# NEC Tray Fill

A primary purpose of managing tray fill is to ensure that power cable carrying load current has enough space around them for ventilation to dissipate heat that might damage the cable insulation. NEC has many tables that list the standard ampacity of cables. It also has many details on standard installation layouts of cables within the cable tray. The combination of a standard ampacity and a standard cable installation layout will ensure that power cables can safely carry the load current without damaging the cable insulation due to overheating. 

The NEC code does specify the method of calculation for tray fill but it is quite convoluted. It depends on the physical and electrical characteristic of the cable and the cable tray and also on the combinations of cables within the tray. When a cable is added to or removed from a tray, the formula to calculate the tray fill could change completely. Therefore, it always requires a complete re-calculation based on the new combination of cables.

The overall tray fill is actually based on three set of calculations for these tray fill rules, 392.22(A), 392.22(B), and 392.22(C). Each cable in the tray is associated with *one* rule set. With a combination of cables, there might be up to three groups of cables in the tray. The tray fill of each cable group is calculated independently, then the results of all three groups are sum up to determine the overall tray fill. If a cable does not fit nicely into these three rule sets, then the application needs to improvise to account for the fill of this cable.